---
title: 'Project Engineering: Manually Split Chunks'
date: 2025-11-05T16:22+08:00
update: 2026-03-22T23:36+08:00
lang: en
duration: 5min
type: blog+note
---

[[toc]]

## Introduction

As a modern front-end developer, you may be very familiar with the word **"chunks splitting"**.

But before this, we must understand the concepts of **"module", "bundle" and "chunk"**: They are the concepts from Webpack, but they are also widely used in other modern bundlers / build tools.

- A "module" is **any source file** in your project (like `.js`, `.ts`, `.vue`, and even though a `.css`, `.svg`, etc.), which can be processed by your bundler / build tool and imported into other modules.
- A "bundle" is **the output file** generated by your bundler / build tool **from each entrypoint module**, **with their related (imported) modules** compiled into it.

  Specially, if a module is never been used by any entrypoint module, it will not been compiled into any bundle, this is called **"tree shaking"**.

  Example:

  _entry.js_

  ```js
  import { foo } from './module.js'

  console.log(foo)
  ```

  _module1.js_

  ```js
  export const foo = 'Hello, World!'
  ```

  _module2.js_

  ```js
  export const bar = 'Hello, World!'
  ```

  _output bundle_

  ```js
  // module1.js
  const foo = 'Hello, World!'
  // entry.js
  console.log(foo)
  ```

- A "chunk" is **a part of a bundle, which can be loaded independently**.

In a word: _"chunks splitting" is to split the large output bundles into smaller chunks, to improve the loading performance of first screen by asynchronously loading the chunks._

The key point of using this technique is how to balance the **size of** the chunks and the **number of** chunks.

- If the chunks are too large, the initial loading time may become too long, especially with low network speed;
- If the chunks are too small, there will be a large number of chunks to load, which may cause the request waterfall;
- Both of the above two edge cases will degrade the loading performance.

## Default Chunks Splitting

Modern bundlers / build tools have already provided a default split strategy preset (includes max chunk size, min chunk size, etc.) for us to use. These strategies are suitable for most of the cases, so we don't need to (I mean, we **shouldn't to**) change these strategies at most of the time, **unless you have special needs and you really know what you are doing**.

By default, modern bundlers / build tools (I just test on Webpack 5 & Vite 7) will extract **async modules** from the bundle into independent chunks, and load them asynchronously when they are needed.

So why we still should care about chunks splitting? Because there is still another thing we **can & must** do: "chunks grouping".

## Why Chunks Grouping?

If you are familiar with the principle of the modern bundlers / build tools, you may know that they will attach file hash to each output file, so that we (actually, it's the browser) can identify the file version easily.

In our front-end project, we may use some third-party dependencies, just like `vue`, `bignumber.js`, etc. And we import them in our source code.

For this default case, some output chunks may contain the compiled result of both our source code and the dependencies' code. Every time we change the source code and re-build our project, the hash of these chunks will always change, and the cache on the CDN will be always invalidated.

If we extract all of the dependencies into some independent chunks, things will be better:

In most cases, the dependencies of our front-end project will not change in a long time, so the hash of the chunks corresponding to these dependencies will not change. Benefited from this, the CDN can work much better, because it can cache these chunks for a longer time.

## How to Group Chunks?

For different bundlers / build tools, the way to group chunks is different.

### Webpack

For Webpack, we can use the `optimization.splitChunks.cacheGroups` in the configuration (like `webpack.config.js`) to group chunks.

_webpack.config.js_

```js
export default {
  output: {
    /**
     * Webpack does not attach hash to chunk files by default, so we should
     * configure it manually.
     */
    filename: '[name]-[contenthash:8].js',
  },
  optimization: {
    splitChunks: {
      /**
       * We want apply cache groups to both `async` and `initial` chunks, so we
       * should use `chunks: 'all'`.
       */
      chunks: 'all',
      cacheGroups: {
        // Extract large vendors into a separate chunk.
        'e-charts': {
          name: 'echarts',
          test: /[\\/]node_modules[\\/]echarts(.*)/,
          priority: 30,
        },
        'element-plus': {
          name: 'element-plus',
          test: /[\\/]node_modules[\\/]element-plus(.*)/,
          priority: 20,
        },
        // Extract common vendors into a separate chunk.
        'vendor': {
          name: 'vendor',
          test: /[\\/]node_modules[\\/]/,
          priority: -10,
          reuseExistingChunk: true,
        },
        // Extract common source code (used by more than 1 chunk) into a
        // separate chunk.
        'default': {
          name: 'default',
          minChunks: 2,
          priority: -20,
          reuseExistingChunk: true,
        },
      },
    },
  },
}
```

### Vite 7

For Vite 7, we can use the `build.rollupOptions.output.manualChunks` in the configuration (like `vite.config.ts`) to group chunks.

> [!Note]
>
> You may notice that the flexibility of configuring chunks grouping in Vite 7 is much lower than Webpack, this is a limitation of Rollup, also the reason why Vite 8 switched to use Rolldown instead of Rollup.

_vite.config.ts_

```ts
export default defineConfig({
  build: {
    rollupOptions: {
      output: {
        manualChunks: (id) => {
          // Extract large vendors into a separate chunk.
          if (/[\\/]node_modules[\\/]echarts.*/.test(id)) {
            return 'echarts'
          }
          if (/[\\/]node_modules[\\/]element-plus.*/.test(id)) {
            return 'element-plus'
          }
          // Extract common vendors into a separate chunk.
          if (/[\\/]node_modules[\\/]/.test(id)) {
            return 'vendor'
          }
          return null
        },
      },
    },
  },
})
```

### Vite 8

For Rolldown Vite (Vite 8), you can see the [official documentation](https://rolldown.rs/in-depth/manual-code-splitting) for more details.

### How to Check the Effects?

TODO...

### Example

See [this example repository](https://github.com/lumirelle/manually-split-chunks) for a complete implementation.
